So I'm about to head to the electronic and mechanical component market here in Seoul, and I need to plan which parts I will need to look for.  I think I can build this project with a number of basic components.  Here's a list of what I think I will need.

A chassis to hold all the parts
A battery pack to power the robot
Some type of movement effector such as wheels or treads, depending on what's available
Ultrasonic sensors for wall and object detection
IR sensors to detect the user, possibly also for wall and object detection
An LCD display to display the time (included with the SIK)
Switches/buttons to turn off the alarm, possibly also to use as contact switches (4 included with the SIK, may need more)
A device to play the alarm sound (the piezo buzzer included with the SIK should do)

That should cover the basics of the system.  However, I had an idea to try and deter the user from picking up the device to shut it off by using a spinning device.  For this I will also need a motor (included with the SIK), and a some sort of stick, like a popsicle stick or chopstick, which I can find anywhere pretty easily.

Other components that I may need include an additional breadboard to wire the components, but hopefully there are enough jumper wires in the SIK to connect everything.  I may also need a new integrated circuit to expand the number of control ports, since I broke mine while going through the SIK guide.

I will head out tomorrow and see what I can find.  It may be very hard to find components since I live in Korea and don't speak Korean well (or at all really).  If I am unsuccessful, I will have to turn to some online vendors and hopefully be able to ship the parts quickly.

...

Ok, so I found a cool little shop that sells Arduino parts online.  The proprietor spoke a little bit of English, so I was able to get my point across about what I was making and what I needed.  I ended up getting everything that I needed from my list for now, and also some extra wires and an extra breadboard.  Here's a video I made showing off the parts:

video link